The Project Gutenberg eBook of “How Can I Help to Abolish
Slavery?” or, Counsels to the Newly Converted, by Maria Weston Chapman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: “How Can I Help to Abolish Slavery?” or, Counsels to the
       Newly Converted
       Anti-Slavery Tracts No. 14

Author: Maria Weston Chapman

Release Date: May 8, 2022 [eBook #68031]

Language: English

Produced by: Steve Mattern, Daniel Lowe, University of Massachusetts
             Library and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK “HOW CAN I HELP TO ABOLISH
SLAVERY?” OR, COUNSELS TO THE NEWLY CONVERTED ***


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                     _ANTI-SLAVERY TRACTS. No. 14._

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                  “HOW CAN I HELP TO ABOLISH SLAVERY?”

                                  OR,

                    COUNSELS TO THE NEWLY CONVERTED.

                        BY MARIA WESTON CHAPMAN.

Yes, my friend, I can resolve your question. Twenty years of actual
experience qualify one to reply. I have stood, as you now stand, on the
threshold of this grandest undertaking of any age—this effort to elevate
a whole people in the scale of moral being—with my head full of plans,
and my heart of devotedness, asking the same question. I really longed
for this coming of millennial glory, and therefore soon found the road
on which to go forth to meet it. My disgust was unutterable, as yours,
too, will be, if you desire the abolition of slavery more than the
temporary triumph of sect or party, at the stupid schemes by which
selfish men were then, as now, trying to make capital for themselves out
of the sacred cause of human rights—seeking to sell the gift of the Holy
Ghost for money. Hear them clamorously and meanly taking advantage of
ignorance, for the promotion of self-interest.

First, hear the agents of slavery presenting the colonization scheme as
the instrument of abolition.

“Aid the Colonization Society.” Yes; to make slavery stronger by
exalting prejudice as an ordination of divine Providence; to make
slavery safer by eliminating that dangerous element, the free black; to
make its term longer by stultifying national conscience. See that
society making the laws of slave States more cruel, the men of the free
States more obdurate, the situation of the free men of color more
difficult and insupportable, as a part of its plan. It could not, if it
would, transport three millions of souls to Africa; the navies and
revenues of the world would be insufficient. It would not, if it could;
for slavery has no intention of parting with its three millions of
victims; unless induced to free them out of generosity, it will keep
them on speculation. Its forty years of colonization labor, and its
million of gold and silver, have exiled fewer to Liberia than have
escaped into Canada in spite of it—less in that period than the monthly
increase of the slaves! It can do nothing for Christianizing Africa, for
it sends a slaveholding gospel, which is anti-Christ. Be not deceived,
then, by a tyrannical mockery like this, working to perpetuate slavery,
and not to abolish it. Aid the American Anti-Slavery Society, which
deals with the heart and conscience of this slaveholding nation,
demanding immediate, unconditional emancipation, without expatriation;
the abolition of slavery by the spirit of repentance, in conformity with
all your own principles and traditions, whether religious or political.

Hear another cry, (coming, not like the first, from the enemies of
abolition, but from friends, generally those of more pretension than
devotedness:) “Form a political party, free soil or other, to vote down
slavery.”

Yes, don’t _kill_ the growing monster—call to him to stop growing; merge
immediatism, which always succeeds, in gradualism, which never does.
Substitute a secondary object for the primary one. Strive in the first
place not to abolish slavery, but to get one set of men out of office
and another in, to learn by the event that the last are as incapable to
turn back the whirlpool that masters the government as the first were.
Make an appeal to force of numbers in a case where you know it is
against you; in a case, too, where, having sworn assistance, you must
lose influence by such an appeal. Spend your time and money, not in
making new abolitionists, but in counting the old ones, that at every
count diminish. Politics, in the common, small sense of the term, merely
takes the circumstances it finds, and does its best with them. But the
present circumstances are unfavorable. THEN CREATE NEW ONES. This is
true politics, in the enlarged, real meaning of the word. Here is a
building to be erected, and no sufficient materials. A _little_
untempered mortar, a _few_ unbaked bricks—that is all. Go to the deep
quarries of the human heart, and make of your sons and daughters
polished stones to build the temple of the Lord. It is this cleaving
into the living rock the AMERICAN ANTI-SLAVERY SOCIETY girds itself to
do. Under its operations men become better and better abolitionists.
Under the labors of political partisanship they necessarily grow worse
and worse. They must ever ask themselves how _little_ anti-slavery
feeling and principle they can make serve the temporary turn; because
the less of either, the greater the chance. They must always be
sacrificing the end to the means. Call them to the witness box in their
capacity of philosophical observers, and out of their little
circumventing political characters, and themselves will tell you that
the effect of electioneering on anti-slavery is most unfavorable, adding
to the existing opposition to right the fury of party antagonism,
throwing away the balance of power, lowering the tone of moral and
religious feeling and action, and thus letting a sacred enterprise
degenerate into a scramble for office. But labor with the AMERICAN
ANTI-SLAVERY SOCIETY _directly_ to the great end, and even Franklin
Pierce and Co., pro-slavery as they are, will grovel to do your bidding.
The administration now _on_ the throne is as good for your bidding as
any other. In a republican land the power behind the throne is _the_
power. Save yourself the trouble of calling caucuses, printing party
journals, distributing ballots, and the like. Let men who are fit for
nothing of more consequence do this little work, which is best done by
mere nobodies. _More_ than enough of them are always ready for it. You,
who are smitten by the sacred beauty of the great cause, should serve it
greatly. Don’t drag the engine, like an ignoramus, but bring wood and
water and flame, like an engineer. The AMERICAN ANTI-SLAVERY SOCIETY has
laid the track.

“Buy slaves and set them free.” Yes; lop the branches and strengthen the
root; make the destruction of the system more difficult by practising
upon it; create a demand for the slave breeder to supply; compromise
with crime; raise the market price, when you ought to stop the market;
put a philanthropic mark upon the slave trade; spend money enough in
buying one man to free fifty gratis, and convert a thousand. But there
is a _wholesale_ way, cries one. “Sell the public lands, and set every
means in motion, from the merely mercantile donation of a million to the
infant cent society, and thus raise two thousand millions of dollars,
and beg the slaveholders to take it, (not as compensation, but as a
token of good will,) and let their bondmen go.” I marvel at this
insufficient notion of the heart of a slaveholder. I wonder exceedingly
at such a want of imagination. “Not as compensation” is well put; for
what sum can compensate a monarch for his throne? This system of slavery
makes the south the parent of long lines of princes. It gives to her
diabolical dominions

    “Kingdoms, and sway, and strength, and length of days.”

I am strangely divided in sympathy. I feel at once the generosity of the
proposal, and have the feeling of contempt with which its insufficient
inappropriateness is received.

“Organize vigilance committees, and establish underground railroads.”
Yes; hide from tyranny, instead of defying it; _whisper_ a testimony;
form a bad habit of mind in regard to despotism; try to keep out the sea
with a mop, when you ought to build a dike; flatter your sense of
compassion by taking private retail measures to have suffering
ameliorated, when you might, with the AMERICAN ANTI-SLAVERY SOCIETY, be
taking public wholesale measures to have _wrong_ (the cause of
suffering) _righted_. You may safely leave with the half and quarter
converted, with the slaveholders, nay, even with the Curtises, the
charge of all these things, which without the American Anti-Slavery
Society are but as hydrogen and nitrogen without oxygen, however good
with it, as the natural fruits of its labors. What I would discourage
is, not mercy and compassion in an individual case, but a disgraceful
mistake in the economy of well doing; spending in salving a sore finger
what would buy the elixir vitæ; preferring the less, which _ex_cludes
the greater, to the greater, which _in_cludes the less. Slavery can only
be abolished by raising the character of the people who compose the
nation; and _that_ can be done only by showing them a higher one. Now,
there is _one_ thing that can’t be done in _secret_; you can’t _set a
good example under a bushel_.

“But instruction! instruction! found schools and churches for the
blacks, and thus _prepare_ for the abolition of slavery.” O, shallow and
shortsighted! the _demand_ is the _preparation_; nothing can supply the
place of _that_. And _exclusive_ instruction, teaching for _blacks_, a
school founded on color, a church in which men are herded ignominiously,
apart from the refining influence of association with the more highly
educated and accomplished,—what are they? A direct way of fitting white
men for tyrants, and black men for slaves. No; if you would teach and
Christianize the nation, strengthen the AMERICAN ANTI-SLAVERY SOCIETY,
the _only_ American institution founded on the Christian and republican
idea of the equal brotherhood of man, and in opposition to a church and
state which deny human brotherhood by sanctioning slavery, and pull down
Christ to their own level. The American Anti-Slavery Society is church
and university, high school and common school to all who need real
instruction and true religion. Of it what a throng of authors, editors,
lawyers, orators, and accomplished gentlemen of color have taken their
degree! It has equally implanted hopes and aspirations, noble thoughts
and sublime purposes in the hearts of both races. It has prepared the
white man for the freedom of the black man, and it has made the black
man scorn the thought of enslavement, as does a white man, as far as its
influence has extended. _Strengthen that noble influence._ Before its
organization, the country only saw here and there in slavery some
“faithful Cudjoe or Dinah,” whose strong natures blossomed even in
bondage, like a fine plant beneath a heavy stone. Now, under the
elevating and cherishing influence of the American Anti-Slavery Society,
the colored race, like the white, furnishes Corinthian capitals for the
noblest temples. Aroused by the American Anti-Slavery Society, the very
white men who had forgotten and denied the claim of the black man to the
rights of humanity now thunder that claim at every gate, from cottage to
capital, from school house to university, from the railroad carriage to
the house of God. He has a place at their firesides, a place in their
hearts—the man whom they once cruelly hated for his color. So feeling,
they _cannot_ send him to Coventry with a horn-book in his hand, and
call it _instruction_! They inspire him to climb to their side by a
visible acted gospel of freedom. Thus, instead of bowing to prejudice,
they conquer it.

“Establish free-labor warehouses.” Indeed! is that a good business
calculation that leads to expend in search of the products of free labor
the time and money that would make all labor free? While wrong exists in
the world, you cannot (short of suicide) but draw your every life breath
in involuntary connection with it; nor is conscience to be satisfied
with any thing short of a complete devotion to the anti-slavery cause of
the life that is sustained by slavery. We _may_ draw good out of evil:
we _must not_ do evil, that good may come. Yet I counsel you to honor
those who eat no sugar, as _you_ ask no questions for conscience’s sake;
while you despise those who thrust forward such a call upon conscience,
_impossible_, in the nature of things, to be obeyed, and therefore not
binding, as if it were the end of the law for righteousness, in order to
injure Garrison, the great and good founder of the American Anti-Slavery
Society. I have seen men stand drawing bills of exchange between England
and the United States, while uttering maledictions against the American
Anti-Slavery Society, because it does not, as such, occupy itself with
the free produce question. This I brand as pro-slavery in disguise—sheer
hypocrisy.

You see, my friend, that I have replied to your question in the
conviction that you desire the abolition of slavery above all other
things in this world; as one assured that it is the great work of
Christianity in our age and country, as the conflict with idolatry was
in other times and climes. Thus you see the salvation of the souls, the
maintenance of the rights, the fulfilment of the duties, and the
preservation of the free institutions of Americans, to depend upon the
extirpation of this accursed and disgraceful disease which is destroying
them. If I had reason to think you merely desirous to make sectarian and
political capital out of a holy thought and a sacred purpose originated
by others—if you were merely contriving defences for what is
indefensible, and trying to save the credit of what is disgraceful,
trying to throw dust, and change the issue, and pay tithes of cumin to
delay justice, in order to spare your own insignificant self in this
greatest conflict of light and darkness, good and evil, which the world
has now to show—if you had been trying how to _seem_ creditably
interested in what ought to be an American’s first business, and
calculating _how little_ instead of _how much_ you might sacrifice to
the soul-exalting cause of freedom—if you were but trying to get
yourself or some friend into office by the judicious use of ideas which,
as a republican and a Christian, you ought to give yourself wholly to be
used by—if you were the hired agent of some demisemiquaver of a movement
which tacked anti-slavery to its other titles, in order to establish a
claim on the purses of abolitionists—in any of these cases I would not
have stopped to talk with you. Your interest being the thing you had at
heart, I should not _counsel_; I should be called, in the name of all
that is holy, to _condemn_ you, in order that blame might awaken
conscience. But the case, I trust, is different. I may, then, say to
you, with all the confidence, nay, certainty, which is inseparable from
experience, knowledge, and utter self-abnegation in the matter, WORK
WITH THE AMERICAN ANTI-SLAVERY SOCIETY. Lavish your time, your money,
your labors, your prayers, in that field, which is the world, and you
will reap a thousand fold, now and hereafter. This movement _moves_. It
is alive. Hear how every thing mean and selfish struggles, hisses, and
dies under its influence. Never, since the world was, has any effort
been so clear, so strong, so uncompromising, so ennobling, so holy, and,
let me add, so successful. It is “the bright consummate flower” of the
Christianity of the nineteenth century. Look at those who “have not
resisted the heavenly vision” it presented them of a nation overcoming
its evil propensities, and doing right at all risks; ask _them_ whether
it has not saved their souls alive; ask _them_ if it has not made them
worshippers of the beauty and sublimity of high character, till they are
ready to “know nothing on earth but Jesus Christ and him crucified.” For
this they give all—wealth, youth, health, strength, life. Worldly
success, obtained by slackening their labors against slavery, (and it is
easy to have it on those terms at any moment, so placable a monster is
the world,) strikes them like failure and disgrace. They have “scorned
delights, and lived laborious days,” till at length they feel it no
sacrifice, but the highest joy. All this the American Anti-Slavery
Society demands of _you_. DO IT! and be most grateful for the
opportunity of fulfilling a work which is its own exceeding great
reward. DO IT, and find yourself the chosen of God, to keep alive in
this nation, degraded and corrupted by slavery, the noble flame of
Christian faith, the sentiment of honor and fidelity, the instinct of
high-mindedness, the sense of absolute, immutable duty, the charm of
chivalrous and poetic feeling, which would make of the poorest Americans
the Christian gentlemen of the world.

              “Cherish all these high feelings that become
              A giver of the gift of liberty.”

You will find yourself under the necessity of doing it in _this_ noble
company, or _alone_. Try it. Strive to be perfect, as God is perfect—to
act up to your own highest idea, in connection with church or state in
this land corrupted by slavery, and see if you are helped or hindered.
Be not dragged along by them protesting. It is graceing as a slave the
chariot wheels of a triumph. But flee from them, as one flees out of
Babylon. Secure the blessing of union for good, and be delivered from
the curse of union in evil, by acting with the AMERICAN ANTI-SLAVERY
SOCIETY, its members and friends.

I use this mode of expression advisedly, for I am not speaking of a mere
form of association. Many are in harmonious coöperation with it who have
neither signed the constitution nor subscribed the annual half dollar.
Hence it is neither a formality nor a ceremony, but a united,
onward-flowing current of noble lives.

If, then, you feel that devotedness of heart which I verily think your
question indicates, I feel free to counsel you to go _immediately_ to
the nearest office of the American Anti-Slavery Society,[1] by letter,
if not in person, subscribe what money you can afford—the first fruits
of a life-long liberality, and _study_ the cause like a science, while
promoting it like a gospel, under the cheering and helpful sympathy of
some of the best company on earth; _but not unless_; for _this_ company
despises what politicians, ecclesiastical and other, call “getting
people committed.” They have a horror of this selfish invasion of
another’s freedom, as of the encumbrance of selfish help. They warn you
not to touch the ark with unhallowed hands.

One consideration more—the thought of what you owe to your forerunners
in what you feel to be the truth. It is, to follow meekly after, and be
baptized with the baptism that they are baptized with. “Thus it
_becometh_ us to fulfil all righteousness;” and the more your talents,
gifts, and graces may, in your own judgment, be superior to theirs, the
more _becoming_ it will be to seek their fellowship; for in the whole
land they, and _they alone_, _are right_. It is not eulogy, but fact,
that theirs is the path of the just, shining more and more unto the
perfect day—denied only by the besotted with injustice, the committed to
crime. Consider, then, not only what you owe to your slavery-cursed
country, your enslaving as well as enslaved countrymen, your fathers’
memory, your remotest posterity, the Christian religion, which forbids
the sacrifice of one man’s rights to another man’s interests, and which
knows no distinction of caste, color, or condition,—but consider, also,
what you owe to those individuals and to that brotherhood who have
battled twenty years in the breach for _your_ freedom, involved with
that of the meanest slave.

Imagine how the case stood with those who perished by suffocation in the
Black Hole at Calcutta. Suppose that some of their number had felt the
sublime impulse to place their bodies in the door, and the high devoted
hearts to stand the crushing till dawn awoke the tyrant; the _rest_ of
that doomed band might have passed out alive. This is what the American
Anti-Slavery Society has been unflinchingly doing for you, and for the
rest of the nation, amid torture, insult, and curses, through a long
night of terror and despair. The life of the land, its precious moral
sense, has been thus kept from suffocation. The free agitating air of
faithful speech has saved it. The soul of the United States is not dead,
thanks, under Providence, to that noble fellowship of resolute souls, to
find whom the nation has been winnowed. Do your duty by them, in the
name of self-respect. Such companionship is an honor accorded to but
few, and of that worthy few I would fain count you one. Strike, then,
with them at the existence of slavery, and you will see individual
slaves made free, anti-slavery leaven introduced into parties and
churches, instruction diffused, the products of free labor multiplied,
and fugitives protected, in exact proportion to the energy of the grand
onset against the civil system.

                  *       *       *       *       *

NOTE. The work of the American Anti-Slavery Society is carried on by
newspapers, books, tracts, agents, meetings, and conventions. The donor
is requested to specify to what department, and in what section of
country, he wishes his contribution applied.

-----

Footnote 1:

  For the local offices, see bottom of page 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

           CONSTITUTION OF THE AMERICAN ANTI-SLAVERY SOCIETY.

               FORMED IN PHILADELPHIA, DECEMBER 4, 1833.

Whereas the Most High God “hath made of one blood all nations of men to
dwell on all the face of the earth,” and hath commanded them to love
their neighbors as themselves; and whereas our national existence is
based upon this principle, as recognized in the Declaration of
Independence, “that all mankind are created equal, and that they are
endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights, among which
are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness;” and whereas, after the
lapse of nearly sixty years, since the faith and honor of the American
people were pledged to this avowal before Almighty God and the world,
nearly one sixth part of the nation are held in bondage by their
fellow-citizens; and whereas slavery is contrary to the principles of
natural justice, of our republican form of government, and of the
Christian religion, and is destructive of the prosperity of the country,
while it is endangering the peace, union, and liberties of the States;
and whereas we believe it the duty and interest of the masters
immediately to emancipate their slaves, and that no scheme of
expatriation, either voluntary or by compulsion, can remove this great
and increasing evil; and whereas we believe that it is practicable, by
appeals to the consciences, hearts, and interests of the people, to
awaken a public sentiment throughout the nation that will be opposed to
the continuance of slavery in any part of the republic, and by effecting
the speedy abolition of slavery, prevent a general convulsion; and
whereas we believe we owe it to the oppressed, to our fellow-citizens
who hold slaves, to our whole country, to posterity, and to God, to do
all that is lawfully in our power to bring about the extinction of
slavery, we do hereby agree, with a prayerful reliance on the divine
aid, to form ourselves into a society to be governed by the following
constitution:—

ARTICLE I.—This society shall be called the AMERICAN ANTI-SLAVERY
SOCIETY.

ARTICLE II.—The objects of this society are the entire abolition of
slavery in the United States. While it admits that each State in which
slavery exists has, by the constitution of the United States, the
exclusive right to _legislate_ in regard to its abolition in said State,
it shall aim to convince all our fellow-citizens, by arguments addressed
to their understandings and consciences, that slaveholding is a heinous
crime in the sight of God, and that the duty, safety, and best interests
of all concerned require its _immediate abandonment_, without
expatriation. The society will also endeavor, in a constitutional way,
to influence Congress to put an end to the domestic slave trade, and to
abolish slavery in all those portions of our common country which come
under its control, especially in the District of Columbia, and likewise
to prevent the extension of it to any State that may be hereafter
admitted to the Union.

ARTICLE III.—This society shall aim to elevate the character and
condition of the people of color, by encouraging their intellectual,
moral, and religious improvement, and by removing public prejudice, that
thus they may, according to their intellectual and moral worth, share an
equality with the whites of civil and religious privileges; but this
society will never, in any way, countenance the oppressed in vindicating
their rights by resorting to physical force.

ARTICLE IV.—Any person who consents to the principles of this
constitution, who contributes to the funds of this society, and is not a
slaveholder, may be a member of this society, and shall be entitled to
vote at the meetings.

ARTICLE V.—The officers of this society shall be a president,
vice-presidents, a recording secretary, corresponding secretaries, a
treasurer, and an executive committee of not less than five nor more
than twelve members.

ARTICLE VI.—The executive committee shall have power to enact their own
by-laws, fill any vacancy in their body, and in the offices of secretary
and treasurer, employ agents, determine what compensation shall be paid
to agents and to the corresponding secretaries, direct the treasurer in
the application of all moneys, and call special meetings of the society.
They shall make arrangements for all meetings of the society, make an
annual written report of their doings, the expenditures and funds of the
society, and shall hold stated meetings, and adopt the most energetic
measures in their power to advance the objects of the society. They may,
if they shall see fit, appoint a board of assistant managers, composed
of not less than three nor more than seven persons residing in New York
city, or its vicinity, whose duty it shall be to render such assistance
to the committee in conducting the affairs of the society as the
exigencies of the cause may require. To this board they may from time to
time confide such of their own powers as they may deem necessary to the
efficient conduct of the society’s business. The board shall keep a
record of its proceedings, and furnish a copy of the same for the
information of the committee, as often as may be required.

ARTICLE VII.—The president shall preside at all meetings of the society,
or, in his absence, one of the vice-presidents, or, in their absence, a
president pro tem. The corresponding secretaries shall conduct the
correspondence of the society. The recording secretary shall notify all
meetings of the society and of the executive committee, and shall keep
records of the same in separate books. The treasurer shall collect the
subscriptions, make payments at the direction of the executive
committee, and present a written and audited account to accompany the
annual report.

ARTICLE VIII.—The annual meeting of the society shall be held each year
at such time and place as the executive committee may direct, when the
accounts of the treasurer shall be presented, the annual report read,
appropriate addresses delivered, the officers chosen, and such other
business transacted as shall be deemed expedient.

ARTICLE IX.—Any anti-slavery society or association founded on the same
principles may become auxiliary to this society. The officers of each
auxiliary society shall be ex officio members of the parent institution,
and shall be entitled to deliberate and vote in the transactions of its
concerns.

ARTICLE X.—This constitution may be amended, at any annual meeting of
the society, by a vote of two thirds of the members present, provided
the amendments proposed have been previously submitted, in writing, to
the executive committee.

                  *       *       *       *       *

_Published for gratuitous distribution, at the Office of the_ AMERICAN
ANTI-SLAVERY SOCIETY, _No. 138 Nassau Street, New York_. _Also to be had
at the Anti-Slavery Offices, No. 21 Cornhill, Boston, and No. 31 North
Fifth Street, Philadelphia; and at the Anti-Slavery Depository, Salem,
Columbiana Co., Ohio._

                          Transcriber’s Notes

Some inconsistencies in spelling, hyphenation, punctuation, and
typography have been retained.

This file uses _underscores_ to indicate italic text.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK “HOW CAN I HELP TO ABOLISH
SLAVERY?” OR, COUNSELS TO THE NEWLY CONVERTED ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
